Revamp Inference Providers doc (#1652)
huggingface/hub-docs: docs/api-inference/hub-api.md

# Hub API

> The Hub provides a few API to deal with Inference Providers. Here is a list of them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Hub provides a few APIs to interact with Inference Providers. Here is a list of them:
```

## List models

To list models powered by a provider, use the `inference_provider` query parameter:

```sh
# List all models served by Fireworks AI
~ curl -s https://huggingface.co/api/models?inference_provider=fireworks-ai | jq ".[].id"
"deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-V3-0324"
"deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-R1"
"Qwen/QwQ-32B"
"deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-V3"
...
```

> It can be combined with other filters to e.g. select only text-to-image models:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It can be combined with other filters to e.g. select only `text-to-image` models:
```

```sh
# List text-to-image models served by Fal AI
~ curl -s https://huggingface.co/api/models?inference_provider=fal-ai&pipeline_tag=text-to-image | jq ".[].id"
"black-forest-labs/FLUX.1-dev"
"stabilityai/stable-diffusion-3.5-large"
"black-forest-labs/FLUX.1-schnell"
"stabilityai/stable-diffusion-3.5-large-turbo"
...
```

> Pass a comma-separated list to select from multiple providers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pass a comma-separated list of providers to select multiple:
```

```sh
# List image-text-to-text models served by Novita or Sambanova
~ curl -s https://huggingface.co/api/models?inference_provider=sambanova,novita&pipeline_tag=image-text-to-text | jq ".[].id"
"meta-llama/Llama-3.2-11B-Vision-Instruct"
"meta-llama/Llama-3.2-90B-Vision-Instruct"
"Qwen/Qwen2-VL-72B-Instruct"
```

Finally, you can select all models served by at least one inference provider:

```sh
# List text-to-video models served by any provider
~ curl -s https://huggingface.co/api/models?inference_provider=all&pipeline_tag=text-to-video | jq ".[].id"
"Wan-AI/Wan2.1-T2V-14B"
"Lightricks/LTX-Video"
"tencent/HunyuanVideo"
"Wan-AI/Wan2.1-T2V-1.3B"
"THUDM/CogVideoX-5b"
"genmo/mochi-1-preview"
"BagOu22/Lora_HKLPAZ"
```

## Get model status

> If you are interested by a specific model and want to check if at least 1 provider serves it, you can request the `inference` attribute in the model info endpoint:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To find an inference provider for a specific model, request the `inference` attribute in the model info endpoint:
```

<inferencesnippet>

<curl>

```sh
# Get google/gemma-3-27b-it inference status (warm)
~ curl -s https://huggingface.co/api/models/google/gemma-3-27b-it?expand[]=inference
{
"_id": "67c35b9bb236f0d365bf29d3",
"id": "google/gemma-3-27b-it",
"inference": "warm"
}
```
</curl>

<python>

In the `huggingface_hub`, use `model_info` with the expand parameter:

```py
>>> from huggingface_hub import model_info

>>> info = model_info("google/gemma-3-27b-it", expand="inference")
>>> info.inference
'warm'
```

</python>

</inferencesnippet>

Inference status is either "warm" or undefined:

<inferencesnippet>

<curl>

```sh

> # Get inference status (not warm)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Get inference status (no inference)
```
maybe clearer?

~ curl -s https://huggingface.co/api/models/manycore-research/SpatialLM-Llama-1B?expand[]=inference
{
"_id": "67d3b141d8b6e20c6d009c8b",
"id": "manycore-research/SpatialLM-Llama-1B"
}
```

</curl>

<python>

In the `huggingface_hub`, use `model_info` with the expand parameter:

```py
>>> from huggingface_hub import model_info

>>> info = model_info("manycore-research/SpatialLM-Llama-1B", expand="inference")

> >>> info.inference_provider_mapping

Reviewer 2: `inference_provider_mapping` or `inference`? (I see you're accessing `inference_provider_mapping` below too, but with `expand="inferenceProviderMapping"`, not `expand="inference"`)

```suggestion
>>> info.inference
```

Author: wrong copy-paste!

<inferencesnippet>

<curl>

```sh
# List google/gemma-3-27b-it providers
~ curl -s https://huggingface.co/api/models/google/gemma-3-27b-it?expand[]=inferenceProviderMapping
{
    "_id": "67c35b9bb236f0d365bf29d3",
    "id": "google/gemma-3-27b-it",
    "inferenceProviderMapping": {
        "hf-inference": {
            "status": "live",
            "providerId": "google/gemma-3-27b-it",
            "task": "conversational"
        },
        "nebius": {
            "status": "live",
            "providerId": "google/gemma-3-27b-it-fast",
            "task": "conversational"
        }
    }
}
```
</curl>

<python>

In the `huggingface_hub`, use `model_info` with the expand parameter:

```py
>>> from huggingface_hub import model_info

>>> info = model_info("google/gemma-3-27b-it", expand="inferenceProviderMapping")
>>> info.inference_provider_mapping
{
    'hf-inference': InferenceProviderMapping(status='live', provider_id='google/gemma-3-27b-it', task='conversational'),
    'nebius': InferenceProviderMapping(status='live', provider_id='google/gemma-3-27b-it-fast', task='conversational'),
}
```

</python>

</inferencesnippet>

> For each provider, you get the status (`staging` or `live`), the related task (here, `conversational`) and the providerId. In practice, this information is mostly relevant for the JS and Python clients. The relevant part is to know that the listed providers are the ones serving the model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each provider serving the model shows a status (`staging` or `live`), the related task (here, `conversational`) and the providerId. In practice, this information is relevant for the JS and Python clients. 
```
